they've been held for many long
agonizing weeks the first batch of
hostages kidnapped by Hamas militants
during its October 7 terror attack on
Israel have been released it's part of a
4-day truce between Israel and the
militant group brokerage by Qatar
earlier on Friday evening this Convoy of
Red Cross Vehicles crossed from Gaza
over the Rafa Border Crossing into Egypt
carrying 13 Israelis freed as part of a
deal brokered by by Qatar also in these
vehicles were 10 hostages from Thailand
and one from the Philippines freed under
a separate deal the passengers were then
met by Israeli soldiers for
identification checks and then taken
from Egypt back into Israel to Major
hospitals for medical treatment and to
be reunited with their families Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
addressed the media after their
release we have now completed the return
of a first of our abductees children
their mothers other women but I stress
to you to the families and to you
citizens of Israel we are committed to
the return of all of our abductees this
is one of the goals of a war and we are
committed to achieving all of the goals
of a
war and US President Joe Biden said the
release of the hostages was the result
of weeks of intense diplomacy here's
some of what he had to
say I've consistent ly pressed for a
pause in the fighting for two reasons to
accelerate and expand humanitarian
assistance going into Gaza and two to
facilitate the release of hostages and
over the past several weeks I've spoken
repeatedly with the Amir of cutter the
president CCE of Egypt and prime
minister n NY of Israel to help secure
this deal to nail it down and I want to
thank all three leaders for their
personal partnership to get this done I
spoke with the Emir and president lce
and the Prime Minister Netanyahu again
on Wednesday to confirm the elements of
the engagement as I said today's release
are the start of a process we expect
more hostages to be released tomorrow
and more the day after and more the day
after that over the next few days we
expect that dozens of hostages will be
returned to their families we also
remember all those who are still being
held and renew our commitment to work
for their release as
well in Germany there is relief after
four hostages holding German citizenship
were among those released many of the
people kidnapped by Hamas are dual
citizens the German Nationals include a
77-year-old woman and a mother and her
two daughters aged two and four
Germany's foreign minister analina babok
had this to say about their
release I am immensely relieved that 24
hostages have just been released from
Gaza including four Germans
that a father after 49 days of Hell of
unbelievable anxiety can finally hold
his two little daughters and his wife
safely in his arms
again my personal thanks go to my catari
counterpart the international Committee
of the Red
Cross and
Egypt but there are still over 200 women
and men
and especially
children in the hands of
Hamas our thoughts are with them
today and also with their
families as much as this day is a day of
hope it's not a day to breathe a sigh of
relief so Hamas is due to release more
Israeli hostages over the coming days 50
in total in exchange for 150 Palestinian
prisoners held in Israeli jails on
Friday evening a group of 39 Palestinian
inmates in the occupied West Bank were
freed as part of the temporary truce the
group made up of women and teenage boys
was released near rala Red Cross
representatives were at the scene to
collect them the Associated Press
reported that Israeli forces fir tear
gas at Palestinian crowds in an attempt
to push them back from the
prison
and we're joined Now by Middle East
expert Daniel gak he's a journalist and
editor and chief of the magazine senit
here in Berlin Daniel tell me how much
of a political accomplishment is this
deal it's a huge political
accomplishment because the parties
involved can show and can also showcase
evidently that uh negotiations work um
it's a major breakthrough I mean I'm not
saying that everything is going to be
Implement implemented according to plan
I'm not sure if maybe the ceasefire is
going to be broken or interrupted but
the fact that that in the middle of a
war where you have one party doomed
which is Hamas and the other side Israel
declaring that it wants to annihilate
Hamas and still uh we see that it's
possible to negotiate deals between them
it's a risky strategy and it took a lot
of I think nightmarish headache on the
side of the negotiators namely the
qataris uh the US and uh the Egyptians
um but it's interesting that it works
and we see that we shouldn't take too
all the information that face value we
have this massive destruction in the
Gaza Strip but at the same time we have
talks ongoing we have negotiations we
have a certain Readiness even between
the worst of enemies to to to come to a
deal that doesn't mean that the war is
over it doesn't mean that the military
campaign is over and it doesn't mean
that all the hostages are going to be
released but there is a model how
instrumental was Qatar in this would we
be here without Qatar today hugely
instrumental um the qataris were the
ones who according to the information
that I got designed the process and you
can see the Qatari signature in much of
what happened first of all they they
really did like Playbook Med mediation
and it took me some time to understand I
followed it from the very beginning
actually how they created expectations
on both sides how they shaped a
narrative saying look Hamas did
something terrible but they didn't
intend to do to harm to such magnitude
to the Israelis they actually wanted to
uh kidnap uh Israeli military and then
uh negotiate the release of them in ex
change for for Hamas prisoners and
Israeli prisons I'm not saying that this
is the true story but it's an it's a
narrative to sh to to create
expectations in both sides then they
announced many times in in in a rather
candid cander openness we are close to a
deal we have that number of hostages
that can be released we have the United
States on board we have the Israelis on
board then they said okay the Israelis
are not yet in we have to convince netan
but they were at the same time very
strategic and also strategically
communicate communic unting or even
sometimes transparent about their
frustrations and their efforts and it
was quite interesting they didn't want
to sideline the Egyptians at the same
time which is very important of course
they needed to have the United n the
United States on board um it's a very
interesting uh story and I think of
course it can't be written now but it
will be in the in the near future now
this is a truth that is set to last four
days for now what happens on day five or
whatever the day after may be look for
the Israeli government it is clear and I
think they have the support of a major
part of the population that a military
campaign of some sort has to continue
because they they say they want to
destroy Hamas they want to end Hamas
rule over the Gaza Strip and they want
to make sure that Hamas will never
Strike again at Israel at the same time
they have that before they said that
before and we have seen Israeli Prime
Ministers in war saying we will not
leave unless we have killed every single
one of them but at the same time then
they were ready for some sort of a
political compromise what is what is
clear for Israel that a return to Hamas
rule over the Gaza is not an option
maybe some sort of an Arab initiative
could uh could materialize could
crystallize even though everyone is very
like uh careful about it they don't want
because the framework is isn't clear and
because they wanted to make sure that
they don't have to pick up the pieces
behind the destruction that Israel has
caused in the Gaza Strip but but in
general I think some sort of an Arab
engagement is possible and would also be
the only reasonable way way to to to put
an end to this War uh netan needs some
sort of a face saving solution at the
same time he needs so he needs a victory
and of course the release of hostages is
a major victory for him uh after all the
failure and and the dread that Israelis
and Palestinians have suffered in the
last couple of weeks talking about the
suffering in the Gaza Strip specifically
there have been calls all around the
globe for a ceasefire a permanent
ceasefire how do you think the
International Community and especially
um countries like the United States and
Qatar are going to use the the weight
that they have in this to maybe change
Israeli minds or or exert some sort of
pressure us Qatari Alliance is not an
Alli political Alliance it's not that
they don't agree on all the aspects the
country is true like I think the the US
are very clear that they don't call for
a cease for for for terminate SE
ceasefire because they think that Israel
should have the right to continue the
military campaign at the same time they
see the devastation destruction that
this campaign has caused which went
beyond what can be considered an
anti-terror operation the other state
department says that they're not going
to support it any longer if there's no
plan for the Palestinians took them
quite some time to come to that uh that
uh statement and on the other hand you
have the qataris who are of course Pro
Palestinian and who said from the very
beginning that this operation is
unjustified so there's no there's no
agreement we don't have an agreement
even inside Europe about ceasefire the
German government was very ambivalent
and ambiguous about it so uh I think a a
ceasefire is something that needs to
come into operation with a success and
the hostages though you should also look
at them at at the case in an isolated
fashion because it's not the only
dossier that is happening here but at
the same time I think the hostages can
can can create trust between the
negotiating parties of which Hamas is
not directly part and that is of course
a major challenge for diplomacy but hey
these are the moments for for real
crisis diplomacy for real professionals
who I think can solve the situation
because you have reasonable people on
the Israeli side who see that their
military campaign with these
consequences uh is to say the least not
sustainable to the security interest you
say there's not going to be a ceasefire
until there is Success what would
success look like that depends very much
on on of course the hamas's behavior
hamas's operation and on the margin that
you give them uh you know I'm drafting
scenarios sometimes and I W don't want
to say that all parties would agree to
that but let's just like imagine that a
group of Arab states would agree that
they can provide some sort of of a
security and police force in cooperation
with Palestinian with the Palestinian
people supported by the United States
the European Union and eventually Israel
I think in such a scenario it would be
very very difficult to swallow for Hamas
but I don't think they have major
options and let's not forget that there
is countries in the region that have
leverage over them and Qatar is a small
one but a very important one that's
Daniel G great speaking to you thank you
so much thank you much more to talk
about let's do that with Aaron lurman
he's a former deputy National Security
adviser to the Israeli government and
editor and chief of the Jerusalem
strategic Tribune Mr lurman good to have
you on the show what are the chances of
this temporary ceasefire turning into a
permanent
one uh I would say practically Neil um
the expectation of the Israeli people at
large and that goes from uh the
traditional left and Center to to the
right um it's not a matter of a
government position or a or a a group
group of hardened politicians this is a
public very broadly held public
sentiment the Hamas cannot be allowed to
continue to govern Gaza and the
likelihood that they will lay down their
arms and uh and surrender or um and
basically
um find a way out of Gaza to be replaced
by something more uh amenable to our
future security and to the well-being of
the Palestinian people is also more or
less at zero so um The Campaign is bound
to continue until Hamas no longer holds
sway over the people of Gaza and
threatens Israeli security and and and I
don't see a point at this stage much as
we would all like this to end in a
manner that does not require further
military action I don't see a way uh to
do it um try to imagine U frankly what
would be uh Europe would be like what
Germany would be like if there was a
ceasefire in October 44 yeah would you
say
somehow sorry would you say that until
now though the IDF Mission would you say
that until now the IDF mission in Gaza
has been a
success yes um it was very gradually
carried out it is very um well
coordinated there are three
elements involved tactical intelligence
which recovered from the shock of
October 7 um very close support from the
third dimension from the air that
includes the Air Force and then drones
and all these elements which are now um
temporarily held because of the PA in
the fighting and very disciplined uh
progress by the ground forces uh it's
it's been painful we've taken uh losses
but the results I think are well above
what was expected when uh when we
originally uh launched the ground
campaign and much of the Hamas presence
in the north has been um destroyed uh
other areas are now
contained and uh the capacity to destroy
Hamas has been proven to exist
yeah October 7th was of course an
unprecedented attack on Israel and in an
recent article you wrote you said it
triggered an unprecedented response from
Washington and can you tell us briefly
maybe what the US's role has been in
shaping the aftermath of October
7th well um the American response I
think uh reflected first and foremost a
recognition that the enormity of the
crimes committed against people I would
say Jewish people but some of the
victims were actually Arabs uh bedwin in
the netive and others but the enormity
of the crimes committed by
Hamas really uh raised shadows and
memories from darker times in history uh
President Biden is certainly mindful of
that um and in addition they could see
The Hidden Hand of Iran behind all this
and so what they did shape is the um
let's say the balance of um deterring
others Iran and Hezbollah uh from going
all out into the war their choice was to
go halfway in bah has lost nearly 90
Fighters already in in confrontations
with Israel we have had to Evac evacuate
large areas of the north because of
attacks on our civilian areas but it is
not yet the fullscale war of which they
are capable and this to some extent is
due to the American um deterrent and
let's now uh bring in Marina Miron she's
a military Analyst at King's College
London Marina what does this truce mean
for the IDF operation against Hamas in
Gaza good afternoon well politically
it's a very important sign for Netanyahu
and for his government however in terms
of operations we have heard um the
Qatari side explaining that they ensured
that everything should be going
according to the plan however ceasefires
usually are very shaky and there is a
chance that it might break down not
because um somebody voluntarily wants to
break it down but because of human error
so it's a very shaky process at the same
time the IDF uh has to stay alert it
doesn't mean that the IDF can now relax
for 4 days because there will be people
wanting to move to the north from the
south on the one hand on the other hand
Hamas might be taking this opportunity
to regroup recover uh perhaps um rotate
Personnel it's very flexible now it has
all the surveillance on the IDF
operation and so they can better
estimate on how to proceed with their
operation because of course they don't
want to be destroyed by the IDF so they
they have to um exploit their advantages
in the Gaza Strip so for the IDF it's a
very important moment especially um when
it comes to the end of the ceasefire and
how the operation will proceed after
that that is a big question now Marina
while we were speaking we were looking
at pictures their live pictures from the
Rafa Crossing showing uh relief trucks
or what I suppose are uh relief trucks
Crossing that border there into the Gaza
Strip or part of the agreement uh and
the ceasefire uh let me ask you
militarily has Hamas anything to gain
from this
truce well um o obviously as I said
they're gaining time and they have the
Strategic asset and that strategic asset
are the hostages meaning that Hamas
could say we will release an aatan for
another 24 hours of ceasefire if they
see fit and and this is very problematic
in the meanwhile while the humanitarian
Aid is arriving Hamas is very well
entrenched in Gaza meaning that even
people who are not actively supporting
Hamas might be CED to support it what
I'm trying to say is for instance
hospitals might be coerced to host
hamas's command and control centers
presumably just in sir um the other
possibility is that Hamas might be
getting some of those humanitarians
supplies to ventilated tunnels because
tunnel ventilation has been a huge
problem and that is what Israel was
trying to prevent by cutting off fuel to
to the Gaza Strip so Hamas can use this
pause to recuperate to readjust its
operations and to select new targets to
try to confuse the IDF to move hostages
so there are many things that could be
happening and for Hamas of course it is
Al also a strategic Victory because they
are dictating essentially the terms of
how this ceasefire is going to work how
this deal is going to
work uh now Marina what do you think is
likely to happen when that 4-day ceas
fire has ended and is not being
extended well I think that the
operations will resume as usual and the
IDF will try to pick up where it left
off before the ceasefire started because
as we know up until the point when the
ceasefire wasn't en acted IDF was
continuing its operation it didn't
decrease the intensity of the operation
the problem is that there is a certain
momentum I explained in the previous
answers that um Hamas might be using
this time um for IDF it's of course
difficult to to connect from where they
left off to four days later because the
circumstances might have changed so
there will be an additional challenge
for the Israel intelligence to try to
see what is happening while the
ceasefire is uh ongoing in order to
update their targeting information in
order to adjust their decision making
and to adjust their plan on the ground
with with the exigencies of the
situation at that moment and I think
that that unless there is another
negotiation to release additional
hostages the war will continue as before
the military analyst Marina Miron there
speaking to us thank you very much
Marina